The Joe Rogan experience. What do you think about what's going on in Hawaii now.
With the protesting of the building of this largest and latest telescope?
Yes, the, the, the TMT 30 meter telescope, which would be,
uh, you know, the largest ever by far of any kind of telescope,
the history of astronomy is one where bigger telescopes
become bigger buckets to collect light.
That's the only telescopes today are the same as telescopes when they were
invented. They're just bigger, right?
The principle behind them is bigger because what they're doing is simple.
All you're trying to do is get as much light as possible.
And the more light you get, the dimmer is the object you can detect.
And the farther away is the object you can see.
And so for every generation of new, large telescopes that have been built,
it is,
it has increased and deepened our understanding of our place in the universe.
So that's just the, that's the background.
The proposal is for a 30 meter telescope, largest ever,
um, on the big island of Hawaii and Monica were there other telescopes there,
other that's where the CAC is, right where the CAC is.
I think they S they cited it in a place that sort of tucked behind most
sight lines to it, but that's not so much what's important here.
It's that the native Hawaiians, from what I've read, uh,
view the mountain as a sacred place. And so, uh,
to put a telescope yet another telescope there becomes sort of invasion of
sacred land. And so, so yeah, it's, it's,
it's, uh, there's a standoff last. I looked, I mean,
people protesting in the streets and there's some native Hawaiians who embrace
this because it means jobs, high high-quality jobs, engineering jobs.
Cause you gotta build it, you gotta maintain it.
There's an entire supportive infrastructure for that. That means jobs.
Um, and it's done in collaboration with the university of Hawaii. Um, and the,
all the other telescopes are partnered with the university of Hawaii where
people are educated there. And so, so at the end of the day,
you have to ask, well, how are we going to make decisions going forward?
Are you gonna make them democratically?
Then you take a vote or you do you want the natives to,
to be the deciders of their own fate? And is that democratic? Okay,
so the natives vote. Okay. Or is it the few people who are protesting?
Do they win the day? I mean, it's, it's complicated and it's very, it's very,
there's a lot of nuanced issues going on. There. There's a,
there's a branch of thinking that the, the United States government and,
and normal municipal, uh, leaders have no authority over it.
There are some who claim that this is native Hawaiian property that does not
belong to any municipal entity of the U S government.
So therefore even state representatives have no say, right.
So there's a lot going on there. Okay.
But if I were to weigh in, this is how I would do so. Okay.
I would say first, um,
I think what should happen is,
I don't know if they even have the infrastructure.
I don't know how the system is set up, but if they could set it up this way,
if the mountain is viewed as sacred by the natives,
the natives should have entire say of what happens to the mountain. Okay.
That's how I think that should be.
So now what you want to make sure is that whatever decision gets made
and voted upon by the natives, that it's fully informed, you want,
you don't want to vote being misinformed or under informed in any election,
let alone whether you're voting for a telescope on your sacred mountain. Okay.
Otherwise you're voting out of nowhere, right? Yeah. You're not, you're,
you're influencing your future based on partial information and decisions based
on partial information or bad decisions, no matter what. Okay. So I would say,
hold the vote with the natives and make sure everybody's fully informed.
And here's a bit of information. I just want to add to the information. Okay.
You know what we do as astrophysicists,
we study the universe rather passively at that.
We sit there at the end of a telescope and wait for light to reach us.
It's not a Petri dish where we stir it or heated or freeze it or crack it.
Or we're just kind of they're communing with the cosmos.
My PhD thesis was significantly fed by data that
I obtained from mountaintops at telescopes.
I got my data from mountains in Chile, uh,
set or Tolo and it employed all the natives, the natives,
the local local people. Uh, that's another telescope that,
so there's all these telescopes that all have specific, um, um,
access points to the universe. They're not all asking the same questions.
And so it's the collection of all the data that gives us the complete
understanding. What we think is a complete understanding of the universe.
So what we do is try to understand our place in the
universe.
And all I'm going to say is that if you have power over what happens
on that mountain and it's sacred to you
because whatever that is,
it is something important to you.
And your sense of your understanding of your place in this world
that's would be spiritual significance.
I can tell you that what we learn as
astrophysicists from those mountaintops
gives us a deeper understanding of who
and what we are in this universe.
So I would say that whatever is your concept of God,
be it the, the creator of the universe, the spirit energy,
that pervades all of space and time, whatever is your concept,
the discoveries of astrophysicists, bring you closer to it.
I get your perspective. Let me be the opposing view.
They feel that I'm, I'm not.
Trying to, no, I know this is just information I'm putting.
This is information and I.
Walk out of the room and then you all vote, right? I'm not, you know,
we believe in democracy here and majority rules. That's, uh,
that's kind of a good thing. It's kind of worked all right.
But if it's not majority rules,
I don't know how they're going to make decisions,
but let's say invent a future where that the natives vote. If they vote,
I wanted to make sure they heard what I just said. And,
and now take control of your own fate.
I just don't think they care.
I think they've decided that that's a sacred space and they don't want anybody
doing anything to it. Then that's their decision. Then you think that's okay.
I don't, I don't judge people's. Um,
but if you wanted.
To make a convincing appeal to them, no.
All I would say what I just told you, that's it? That is all I would tell them.
And when they vote, I want them to understand that fact,
I could take it one step further and say
mountaintops, because of the access they give astrophysicists. And,
and by proxy us all to the universe
are sacred places to scientist.
Okay? No, it's not sacred in a religious sense, but it's sacred in a,
in terms of a pathway to knowing and understanding who and what we are in
this universe. We place great value on that.
So, but it's not our land. It's we, you know,
specifically these things have Europeans didn't come to Hawaii and find fine
legions of scientists. They're conducting experiments. Okay.
If on native peoples governing themselves. So, so,
so that's that the consequence, if it gets voted down and that's permanent,
and there's no way around that, that telescope is still going to be built,
it just won't be built in Hawaii.
Well, where will it be built? They have to be built on mountain tops. Yeah.
So there are other mountaintops. Yeah. You.
Want to be above, you know,
schmaltzy clouds and haze and,
and you want a dry environment. So there's less rain clouds. Oh,
you visited very good.
The CAC, uh, more than 10 years ago, the first time.
And it was, I got very fortunate.
It was a night where the moon was not out.
Yes. Moon is not this astronomer's favorite thing. Yeah.
You want the darkest sky. You can, we.
Were worried as we were driving up there, that was really cloudy,
but we drove through the clouds and we got to the top and we got to the
observatory and it was the most amazing without telescopes. Just we,
there was telescopes there, but without telescopes,
it was the most amazing view of the sky I'd ever seen in my life.
And it changed my perspective of our place in the universe.
Looked like we were on a spaceship.
Like we were flying through the universe because of the diffused lighting in,
on the big island,
because it's all set up so that it doesn't ruin what they're trying to
accomplish at the CAC.
Minimize reflections in the wrong place. Not only that,
if there was a moon out and you did ascend up through the clouds,
the Moonlight illuminates the clouds and you are an island in the middle of
white cotton, and you're not even connected to the earth.
It's what you imagined.
Mount Olympus would have been when that happens with the gods up there.
And it's kind of, that's their place it's there. So, so,
so yes. And so any, my, my brethren,
my fellow astrophysicist, who have also observed from mountaintops, by the way,
it's becoming a lost art because when it's not lost,
but it's becoming something we don't do anymore. Something called service,
observing where you put in your observing program and it gets handed to a
technician at the telescope who points the telescope,
gets the data and sends it back to you.
So the next generation doesn't have the experience that my generation did
because it was a pilgrimage to the top of the mountain.
And you converted your life's path.
You converted your life schedule to become nocturnal. And in,
so doing you, you know, this is,
the journey was long enough cause you're in the middle of nowhere.
Now you gotta go nocturnal. And by the time you're ready for this,
you are communing with the cosmos. It is you, the detector,
the telescope and the universe.
And there's an eerie silence up there too.
Cause you don't hear any the hum of maybe the, the, the draw,
the motor of the telescope, but that's it. And so,
so all I'm saying is if they choose to not have it,
the Tulsa will go somewhere else. One of them is the Canary islands.
These are also volcanic, um, hilltops,
not as high as,
as Mt of K that's at 14,000 feet, by the way, I should have checked it.
What temperature,
water boils at the top of Mount a K or we could have rounded that story out. Uh,
but, um, I think it's around 180 degrees actually. Uh,
I think I did actually calculate it one time, but anyhow, so,
so you'd find a mountaintop and we'll put it somewhere else and the data won't
be as good. Um, but that'll be a consequence of it.
And none of that will go to Hawaii. How do.
You think that's going to get resolved though? If you had to guess.
I don't. Um, I, uh, I,
I just don't know.
A lot of people are against it, including Jason Mamoa Aquaman's against it. Oh,
who's out there protesting.
Yeah.
And so we didn't get celebrity types to put the weight of their name behind it.
It, it, it magnifies the cause of others, even if they're in the minority.
And so I, I, like I said, I think native should I.
Hasn't been, does anyone know who all the.
Natives are? Is there,
is there some listing so that they can all vote for this one thing?
You wouldn't want people voting who are not native.
If you're voting on whether it's so sacred, you don't want to put a telescope.
There you'd want people who have a, a,
an indigenous, um,
an indigenous concern for what goes on there. And.
Indigenous in reference to Hawaii is relative. Every,
every usage of the word indigenous is relative, especially with Hawaii,
because I mean, the only indigenous.
People are black people in Africa
that really human life began in Africa.
Everyone else traveled to where they were. So,
so native it's you set a timeframe to declare what is native and what's not.
And the native and it's in its simplest form is, are you born there?
So I'm a native, new Yorker I'm born there,
but I wasn't the original settler there. I would,
my species did not form on Manhattan island. Right.
So everybody traveled to where they are.
They just got there before the Europeans.
And so that has become the definition of indigenous art.
Were you there when the Europeans landed, then you're indigenous,
but two other life forms on that, on that rock, on that, uh, um,
uh, Hawaii's or a volcanic, it's a volcanic, um, archipelago.
Um, uh, do you know how that happens?
By the way you have all these multiple volcanoes in our, in a string?
Do you ever wonder why, how that happens? Sure.
You did wonder what are you doing? Do you know why? Oh,
because there's a hotspot beneath earth crust, it just sitting there. Okay.
And when you beneath there is crushed stuff,
doesn't move around the way it does honors crust earth, crust shifts. Okay.
So that hotspot, gurgles up makes a volcano. Then the hotspot goes dormant,
but the con the shelf still drifts, you still have continental drift.
So it drifts. Then the hotspot says time for me to gurgle again, a girl's up.
Now you get another volcano. And then it goes dormant.
That volcano goes dormant. It shifts you get another one. Anytime you see an,
a chain of islands jet guarantee,
they're made by volcanoes over enough time for continental drift to it shifted
the plates over the hotspot of Earth's mantle.
So do you think what they're concerned with is the eventual spoiling of this
beautiful natural resource that slowly but surely people are putting up houses
there and developments and all these different things.
And then the scientists are saying,
we need this sacred land because we're going to put a volcano and they're like,
look, there's already, there's already a, I mean,
we're going to put a telescope, there's already a telescope up here enough.
You think that's what it is.
They're trying to halt the progress of civilization or, I mean,
maybe progress is a bad word. The expansion of civilization.
Yeah. I mean, think let's go back. Uh, what did Teddy Roosevelt too? He said,
we've got to preserve these lands because they're beautiful. And by the way,
he said that after he shot all his elephants and tigers lions and tigers and
bears, uh, yeah, I mean, I held from a museum,
the American museum of natural history where he's the patron Saint of that
museum.
What happened was he realizes how important this land is and how beautiful it
is. And he is the, he's the patron Saint of the national park system.
So, so that's the secular version of sacred,
right? We don't say it's sacred,
but we've all decided as a community that we care about these lands and you
don't want to drill on it. You don't want to put housing. Um,
was it Lyndon Johnson's wife, lady, bird Johnson,
who said our freeways that were so carefully building after the second world
war, the Eisenhower freeway project. Okay. Hi, you know,
the interstate system is, uh, this is our country.
We want to keep it beautiful. So certain stretches over it.
There are no billboards, billboards would, you know, um,
would change your relationship to nature.
So certain stretches of interstate or
secularly sacred. If, if I can say that.
So I remember visiting, uh, uh,
visiting Australia and there's the famous rock in the, um,
out in the Outback, uh, the old Leura, Ooh,
please help me get, uh, get my correct pronunciation of this
[inaudible] and it said, it's,
I'm told it's one coherent geologic rock.
It's not just an assembly of rocks.
And so I don't know enough about the geology of it,
but I do know that the Australian Aborigines are Hulu room and okay.
Iconic red rock, look at that cool thing. Okay.
So that is one sort of geologic thing.
And, uh,
and climbers want to climb it by the execute it's miles in circumference. Okay.
So, uh, we visited it. I wrote,
I rented a bicycle with my wife and kids and we rode around it. Okay.
So now, um,
that is sacred to the local indigenous peoples.
So they don't want you to climb on it. Well, I'm a rock climber. I, you know,
what do you care? I'm not going to ruin it. I'm not going to,
they don't want you to climb on it. And I try to think to myself,
is there a counterpart to this that would sort of wake up a westerner
to say I get it all right now,
suppose some people from some natives,
from Alaska or from the,
some tribes from Africa or some Aborigines came up from
these remote places of the world, walked up to the Vatican and said,
we want to climb the walls of this Vatican just for sport. What would we say?
We want to climb the walls of St.
Paul's cathedral in downtown London. What would you say? No.
Are those comparable? I mean.
We want to repel down the tower of big Ben.
You're going to say no, get the. Are you would say, no,
these are important structures to us. Now, are you going to say,
are the equivalent well, we built those and the natives didn't build the rock.
Right? Exactly. Okay.
It depends on how important that detail is to you.
All I'm saying is on the level of weak, say, this is sacred.
You say that is sacred,
and now you're gonna have different rules for who's climbing.
What I think it'll force for sure. To take pause.
Here. There's an argument in fo in like supporting what you're saying.
Look at what's going on with the Himalayas. I mean,
it's the human that they ha they leave behind there. All the climbers.
So disturbing the climbers it's horrible. It's really horrible. I mean,
they, there's tons of it. Tons of human waste.
Okay.
So what you do there is if it's still not a problem that people are climbing,
it's that they're leaving waste. You don't stop the climbers,
you tax them at some level.
So that now you have cleanup crews that come up after.
Them, but it's your solution. No, it's incredible to bring anything back.
So there you go. You're all texting them. You make it worth it. All right. So.
You understand, like to leave the bodies up there, right?
You know that they can't hurt. That's what I heard. Well,
why you think they could bring tons of when they can't even bring bodies?
When they invented cars and cars were killing people in the street,
because people didn't know how to cross the street.
They didn't know where to cross the street.
People don't know how to stop the cars. They say, well,
cars are actually a pretty useful thing. Do we ban cars? No. We make stoplights.
Oh, people across here where we make crosswalks, oh, let's put lanes.
So that cars don't hit each other and let's make airbags so that you don't fly
through the windshield. All right. So there are ways around problems.
If you value the thing that it is that you want to do.
So people leaving crap up there, you make them bring it back.
Or you develop a system that enables the stuff to come back no matter what.
And if you can't do that and you don't want it messed up,
then cancel the whole operation. We didn't cancel cars.
We got really innovative.
About how to keep them a big difference to cars and human.
That's left on the side of the mountain. I think the real problem too.
Is I think if you value mountain.
And you want to keep doing it, then you solve the problem.
This is what engineers do. That's all they do is what's your problem.
Being able to bring those bodies back because of the physical limitations of the
human body, it's barely, you barely have enough juice to climb.
It's so thin the air so thin. It's so dangerous.
Energy draw on you. It's so hard to leave those bodies there.
So is that the human that you're talking about or is that you're talking about
the fact that humans were there,
that we got where we were not very clean about our presence.
That's what you're talking about. Well.
We're just being human. We have to go when you gotta go. You gotta to go.
When you got to go up there,
you just open up the hatch and let her rip down the side of the.